Without that,
let's actually look at the templates.
Because I think it is pretty good for
demonstrating the next big question
that if you have not set it all out yet,
you have thought about which is,
all right, can I use React now?
Can I use Vue now?
Can I use Svelte?
Can I use whatever?
And I would say get off my lawn.
But I will show you how to do it
because it is shockingly easy as well.
So I'm gonna go and I'm just gonna
show you how to use a template.
And so we can go ahead, and
we'll take a look in the answer for
how to support a given framework
will be in the template, and
to nobody's surprise,
shockingly easy as well.
And so we'll go up,
I'll go up a level here.
And I'm just gonna say your choice of,
if you use npm, this is npm create vite,
I almost slipped, @latest, and
then where you want it to go.
So we'll call it vite-react.
And if you don't give it any arguments,
It gives you this very pretty list, right?
You could have it wire together, I had
a repo with a bunch of files in it, but
guess what that started its life as?
One of these templates, right?
So you can do it with vanilla JavaScript.
These are the built-in official ones,
there's other things, Heidi and others.
Let's go take a look.
The Electron and a Vitextra.
All right, that one's new,
I don't really know what that one is,
I'm gonna find out that later.
But for our point, all right,
I called the directory React.
We want React, it can be whatever, the
answer's gonna be, everyone's like, React,
all right?
All right, I know my audience.
Let's do that one.
Look, more choices.
And you saw one of these earlier, right?
We can do it with TypeScript or
without TypeScript.
And then basically, speedy web
compiler is a Rust-based compiler.
Is it as full-featured
as some of the standard
JavaScript ones at this moment in time?
Maybe, maybe not, right?
Not for the most part, but for
those in the room, no, it's not.
If you watch this six months from now,
the answer might've changed.
But at this moment,
it is faster, it is better, but
it is not as battle tested as just not.
This is just processing a JSX.
Let's do without just because I
think it'll make it easier to see.
Do we want with or without TypeScript?
What are our feelings right now?
We don't feel strongly, but yes,
there's a thumbs up for TypeScript.
Okay, and you say done and
we do that vite-react,
we'll do an npm install just so
I don't see red squiggly lines everywhere.
And if you use yarn,
then it's yarn create.
If you use pmpm, it's pmpm create,
it's all the same.
Cool, we've got in place, and
let's just open it up in our editor.
And you can see a very
similar layout here, right?
It did give us a ts.config, it did give
us a vite.config, we'll take a look at
that because that's gonna be
the first time we saw a config file.
So let's look at what it
takes to support React.
You grab plugin-react and
you plugin React.
And now you have full support for
JSX and everything along those lines.
Without even this plugin, since it uses
ES build and ES build has this idea
of a JSX parser, you could theoretically
write your own JSX parser as a fun way.
You can have your own,
cuz all JSX does is it turns the stuff
looks HTML into a function name,
whether it's React, or JSX, or whatever.
And then the node name,
the attributes, and then as children,
it's always gonna compile that.
You can give it a different function
if you wanna write your own
framework during launch, go for it.
Yeah, you could even use it to make
regular vanilla dom nodes if you
really wanted to as well, but
all it's doing is adding this plugin here.
And this is the first time
we're seeing configuration,
so it's worth talking about it.
Really, all you need to do to
have a valid Vite configuration
is to export default some object
that has the right shape.
This define config is useful because
it's using effective whether or
not you use TypeScript, it doesn't matter.
This will work with JavaScript, but
in VS Code, it will use the type
information that the Vite comes with
to help you with autocomplete for
a lot of these, and let you know if you
made a boo boo or misspelled something.
So generally speaking,
I would always use to find config
because why not opt into the safety?
But if you just wanted to have
an object like this, go for it, right?
But that is the entire process, right?
So a lot of these things,
again this is that first act,
right, of it is simple, right?
And it is powerful because all of
a sudden, now I've got whatever framework,
I've got whatever CSS
build tools that I need.
I have all of the common infrastructure
that I personally find myself
wiring up over and over again, and I just
kind of have it all in place ready to go,
and I'm not spending
a bunch of time doing that.
And so you got, yeah, Mark.
>> Somebody was linking to the plugin
checker, have you heard of that?
>> Yeah, there's one that will
check the plugin itself, right?
And also, I think that's the one that does
the TypeScript checking for you, right?
Yeah, I don't want that.
[LAUGH] Personally, right?
So there's Vite plugin checker,
see whenever I made a mistake,
before I got that big box on the screen,
if your types don't work,
it'll do it in a separate process,
it'll show you on the screen.
For me, personally,
having it in the editor and
having it at build time gives
me everything that I need.
Because a lot of times, I like the fact
that it's not blocking me from
rendering when I'm still prototyping.
A lot of times, I'm still figuring stuff
out, I wanna see, does this work at all?
And then I'll kind of add
in some the type safety,
I kinda like treat it like JavaScript
at first and I don't necessarily.
Cuz it'll start yelling at you for
stuff like,
well, your TS config is such a strict and
you used an any in here.
I'm like, I'm still figuring out what I'm
doing, I'm pulling in some library, and
I'm doing object keys on it,
because I'm too lazy to not
do dig through all the types.
So yeah, the Vite plugin checker will
like do all that type checking for you.
I personally don't like that in my
workflow, but I would say if it works for
you, go for it.
The list of official plugins,
you've got your view,
you've got everything you
saw on that list, basically.
And there's a site Awesome-vite,
which has got a whole bunch of
various plugins for various things.
There's our Vite plugin checker
that we talked about earlier,
we'll use some of them later on.
For whatever you need, there's also
various other frameworks in here too that
you can kind of play around with.
The other thing that you can do is,
Rich Harris, the creator of Svelte,
made this tool called degit,
which basically is like Git clon.
If you've a Git cloned and
then removed the Git directory,
cuz you just wanna use it as a template.
You can just use this tool and
give it the name of the repo, and
it will effectively clone it,
and remove the git, so
then you can do your own git in it,
and not have the template history.
And so mostly community plugins use this.
And so what I've done personally is for
all the projects I do,
I've got two templates that I
just use all the time, right?
They're set up with prettier
the way that I like it and es lint,
the way that I like it, and
my ts-config the way that I like it.
Everything's set up and ready to go
to the way that I'm happy, and so
that I can just do this and
I've got my own Vite template ready to go.
So even some of these initial
configuration things once you get
everything nailed down to the way
that makes you happiest or
the way it makes your team happiest.
In a lot of these cases, you can just
basically use the repo as your template,
and you're good to go.
And then occasionally,
I'll update the dependencies and
stuff along those lines, so
I always got a fairly fresh version.
But as an easy way to do either for
any of these community templates,
or to make your own, or you can use mine,
whatever makes you happiest are various
effective ways of using these templates.
Somebody asked if import was
a Vite specific thing or-
>> Nope.
>> Web platform.
>> It is a web platform thing.
Import is not a Vite specific thing,
it is a web platform thing.
It is supported,
by definition, in development,
where actually the browser is using
the ES modules out of the box, right?
Again, not compiling is
faster than compiling, right?
And so most modern browsers have
support for ES modules these days.
So all that import syntax is actually
web platform syntax that just Vite
happens to use, right?
So if you put imports all over the place,
you do all this stuff.
And then you find that
you're not gonna use Vite,
along as you do something that takes
modern web standards, you're good to go.
Especially, because again other
than pulling that React plugin,
we haven't really done,
we've basically just written web platform
code with a little bit of relative links.
And I guess that module.css comes from
post CSS in a way it's configured.
But predominantly, we've been able to
use web platform stuff and using the web
platform and to inform Vite about what
the best thing to do is in this situation.
But these are kind of standards
that should apply broadly.
And don't, even if you've seen that ES
syntax before years and years ago, under
the hood, Babel was compiling it to common
JS and it wasn't actually ES modules.
I've been writing import,
whatever from whatever forever.
Yeah, that was unintentional rhyme,
we'll go with it.
Then in those cases, it was actually
turning into const whatever equals
require, and then the library name, but
these are actually using real ES modules.
In development, at build time,
it is then trying to chunk stuff and
all that stuff to have the widest amount
of support, and do tree shaking, and
code splitting, and all that fun stuff.
>> In ts config, module resolution
Bundler could you explain that.
>> A little bit.
So again, we live in a terrible time for
a lot of reasons, but one of them is
we are currently in this world straddled
between common JS and ES modules.
I know that Bundler is a new algorithm
that came with TypeScript 5, right?
M project doesn't use it because
it would start before then,
theoretically Vite is doing
the bundling in this case.
It's just the semantics on whether or
not you need the file extension, so on and
so forth.
I can't claim to be an expert on that one,
so
I don't wanna say something that's
not definitively right on that one,
because it is one of the newest algorithms
for how TypeScript chooses to bundle it.
Interestingly enough, Vite is the one
doing the bundling in this case,
TypeScript is only doing
the type checking.
So as long as you're not getting
necessarily the red squiggly lines or
errors, TypeScript is not the one
doing the building and compilation.
So it doesn't really concern us at this
point, but it is kind of the default
standard that I grab over and over again,
but for when I'm not using Vite.
But the actual details of the algorithm
itself are not something I'm an expert on.